# Iterating and making decisions

In order to control the flow of a program, we have two main weapon: **conditional programming** (also known as **branching**) and **looping**. We can use them in many different combinations and variations.


## Conditional programming

Conditional programming, or branching, is something you do every day, every moment. It  s about evaluating conditions: __if the light is green, then I can cross__; __if it's raining, then I'm taking an umbrella__; and __if I'm late for work, then I'll call my manager__.

The main tool is the ```if``` statement, which comes in different forms and colors, but basically what it does is evaluate an expression and, based on the result, choose which part of the code to execute.

Example: (you can test it by running cond1.py file)

```
late = True
if late:
    print('I need to call my manager!')
```

```late``` acts as a conditional expression, which is evaluated in a Boolean context (exactly life if we're calling ```bool(late)```). If the result of the evaluation is **True**, then we enter the body of code immediately after the ```if``` statement. Notice that the ```print``` instruction is indented: this means it belongs to a scope defined by the ```if``` clause. Execution of this code yields:

```
$ python cond1.py
I need to call my manager!
```

Since ```late``` is ```True```, the ```print``` statement was executed.


Example: (you can test it by running cond2.py file)
 
```
late = False
if late:
    print('I need to call my manager!') #1
else:
    print('No need to call my manager...') #2
```

```late``` is ```False```, so the ```print``` statement will be different:

```
$ python cond2.py
No need to call my manager...
```

Depending on the result of evaluating the ```late``` expression, we can either enter block #1 or block #2, __but not both__. Block #1 is executed when ```late``` evaluates to ```False```.

This example also introduces the ```else``` clause, which becomes very handy when we want to provide ana lternative set of instructions to be executed when an expression evaluates to ```False``` within an ```if``` clause. The else clause is optional, as it's evident by comparing the two examples.


**A specialized else: elif**

Sometimes all you need is to do something if a condition is met (simple ```if``` clause). Other times you need to provide an alternative, in case the condition is ```False``` (```if``` / ```else``` clause), but there are situations where you may have more than two paths to choose from, so since calling the manager (or not calling them) is kind of a binary type of example (either you call ot you don't), let's change the type of example and keep expanding. This time we decide tax percentages. If my income is less than 10k, I won't pay any taxes. If it is between 10k and 30k, I'll py 20% taxes. If it is between 30k and 100k, I'll pay 35% taxes, and over 100k, I'll (gladly) pay 45% taxes.

(you can test it by running taxes.py file)
 
```
income = 15000
if income < 10000:
    tax_coefficient = 0.0 #1
elif income < 30000:
    tax_coefficient = 0.2 #2
elif income < 100000:
    tax_coefficient = 0.35 #3
else:
    tax_coefficient = 0.45 #4

print('I will pay:', income * tax_coefficient, 'in taxes')
```

```
$ python taxes.py
I will pay: 3000.0 in taxes
```

## Looping